Initial PR outlining the governance for the project (#345)
valkey-io/valkey: GOVERNANCE.md

# Project Governance

The Valkey project is managed by a Technical Steering Committee (TSC) composed of the maintainers of Valkey repository.

> The Valkey project includes all of the repositories under the Valkey-io organization.

Reviewer: Should we state explicitly that this includes all **future** repositories under the Valkey-io org as well? or any new repo will automatically be subject to this governance?

Author: Will add future for precision.

> Maintainers are defined as individuals with full commit access to the Valkey repository as well as additional members defined in the [MAINTAINERS.md](MAINTAINERS.md) file.

Reviewer: Does "maintainers" have full-commit access to **all** repositorie or just the main repository?

if it is the later, do we want to qualify "maintainers" and introduce different sub "maintainers" group? like doc/client/website/etc?

Author: Maintainers main the file the MAINTAINERS.md file is in. I see the lack of precision, will fix.

Maintainers of other repositories within the Valkey project are not members of the TSC unless explicitly added.

## Technical Steering Committee

The TSC will be responsible for oversight of all technical, project, approval, and policy matters for Valkey.

The TSC members are listed in the [MAINTAINERS.md](MAINTAINERS.md) file in the Valkey repository.

> New maintainers (and accordingly, TSC members) may be added or removed by no less than 2/3 affirmative vote of the current TSC.

Reviewer: "New" seems redundant.

```suggestion
Maintainers (and accordingly, TSC members) may be added or removed by no less than 2/3 affirmative vote of the current TSC.
```

Reviewer 2: "New" is wrong when it's about removing maintainers.

The TSC will appoint a Chair responsible for organizing TSC meetings.
If the TSC Chair is removed from the TSC (or the Chair steps down from that role), it is the responsibility of the TSC to appoint a new Chair.
The TSC can amend this governance document by no less than a 2/3 affirmative vote.

> The TSC may, at its discretion, add or remove members who are not maintainers of the main Valkey repository.

Reviewer: what is the definition of "members who are not maintainers"? committers? What is the process of removing committers?

Author: I use maintainer/committer interchangeably. I can clarify this is members of the TSC. For example, if we decide Jeff Bezos should be a TSC member, we can add him without adding him as a maintainer to the project if we want.

Reviewer: Yeah let's define the roles precisely. for the record, I don't want Jeff on the TSC but fine with him being a maintainer - is it possible?

Author: > I don't want Jeff on the TSC but fine with him being a maintainer - is it possible?

Yeah, although it's not clear how we would make that happen at the moment.

Reviewer: I am fine with leaving this situation open for now. The reason I am asking is that I think we need to scale out better in the future. The TSC will not be able to review/approve every change say 2 years down the road. I also don't think we should expand TSC for the sake of "scaling". So one option for scaling is to have "maintainers" not on TSC. That said, not a blocker for me for this PR.

Author: My vision, at least, is the TSC should scale to like 8-12 or so people. I think that is a reasonable number for the core. We should further scale by  having folks be maintainers of modules and other sub-repositories like clients.

I'll add that the governance is written so we can solve that problem, later.

Reviewer: >I'll add that the governance is written so we can solve that problem, later.

SGTM. We can have that discussion when we cross that bridge.

The TSC may, at its discretion, add or remove maintainers from other repositories within the Valkey project.

## Voting

The TSC will strive for all decisions to be made by consensus.
While explicit agreement of the entire TSC is preferred, it is not required for consensus.
Rather, the TSC will determine consensus based on their good faith consideration of a number of factors, including the dominant view of the TSC and nature of support and objections.
The TSC will document evidence of consensus in accordance with these requirements.
If consensus cannot be reached, the TSC will make the decision by a vote.

A vote will also be called when an issue or pull request is marked as a major decision, which are decisions that have significant impact on the Valkey architecture or design.
Examples of major decisions:
    * Fundamental changes to the Valkey core datastructures
    * Adding a new data structure or API
    * Changes that affect backward compatibility
    * New user visible fields that need to be maintained
    * Modifications to the TSC or other governance documents

> The TSC Chair will call a vote with reasonable notice to the TSC, setting out a discussion period and a separate voting period.

Reviewer: Can a TSC member call for a vote as well or this responsibility lies with the chair only?

Author: The wording here isn't great, the notion was that the TSC Chair would facilitate it if we needed it, but anyone can request it. I don't know if we need a chair though.

Author: Someone suggested it's "practically" useful to have a chair, if for nothing else, they're the person you go talk to make something happen.

Reviewer: Yeah, having a chair makes sense. My question was more on clarifying the roles of the chair and members. Reading the clauses again, I think it works for me.

Any discussion may be conducted in person or electronically by text, voice, or video.

> The discussion will be open to the public, with the notable exception of discussions involving embargoed security issues or the addition or removal of maintainers, which will be private.

Reviewer: >The discussion will be open to the public

Should we talk about the form of "public disclosure" of these major decision discussions in this doc? or it will be clarified separately?

Author: I tried to be vague when I can be. Do you think we need more detail on what counts as public?

Reviewer: maybe not in this doc but would be good to document it somewhere else. not a blocker for this PR.

Author: I put this in notes for next meeting.

In any vote, each voting TSC member will have one vote.

> The TSC members will give at least two weeks for all members to submit their vote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TSC will give at least two weeks for all members to submit their vote.
```

> Except as specifically noted elsewhere in this document, decisions by vote require a simple majority vote of all voting members.

Reviewer 3: What is the tie resolution?

Author: Not doing the thing I suppose. I don't know we want a tie breaking mechanism if it's 3-3 (or some other even/even in the future), I feel like we'll eventually come to a consensus.

Reviewer: from the process' perspective, I think it is worth defining a tie-breaking process, just for the sake of completeness.  I think we talked about involving LF in the past. Would it make sense to add something along that line?

Author: I still think the answer is status quo wins by default. Like, if the questions is, should we add a feature or not, 3-3 vote means we don't do it.

Reviewer: "status quo wins" does not cover all cases. We could have a situation where the status quo is A but the split is between B and C. The process should have a "catch all" clause for the sake of completeness and default to "higher level" authority is a better process IMO.

Author: > "status quo wins" does not cover all cases. We could have a situation where the status quo is A but the split is between B and C.

Then we do A. I don't think bringing in the LF makes sense to break ties. I have enough trust in us that if A is a bad choice, we will figure it out.

Reviewer: SGTM

## Termination of Membership

A maintainer's access (and accordingly, their position on the TSC) will be removed if any of the following occur:

> * Resignation: Written notice of resignation to the TSC.

Reviewer: can a non-TSC member request the TSC to take a vote on a TSC member's membership? if yes, under what situation can this be requested? what would a (formal) process look like?

Author: I'm going to say no. If a non-TSC member can't get a TSC member to agree with them it's probably not worth forcing.

Author: I don't think this needs any change, but will leave unresolved if you still disagree.

Reviewer: agreed.

* TSC Vote: 2/3 affirmative vote of the TSC to remove a member
* Unreachable Member: If a member is unresponsive for more than six months, the remaining active members of the TSC may vote to remove to unreachable member by simple majority.

## Technical direction for other Valkey projects

> The TSC may delegate decision making for other projects within the Valkey organization to the maintainers responsible for that project.

Reviewer: the delegation is likely a "major-decision" as well. also delegation can be revoked, at the discretion of the TSC.

Author: I can emphasize this point, as well as add it above

# Project Governance

The Valkey project is managed by a Technical Steering Committee (TSC) composed of the maintainers of Valkey repository.

> The Valkey project includes all of the current and future repositories under the Valkey-io organization.

Reviewer 2: "the Valkey-io organization" just means the github org. It sounds like were defining our project in terms of whats under the github org, but it's rather the other way around. Can we write it in a different way?

```suggestion
The Valkey project stores its repositories on GitHub under the valkey-io organization.
```

Author: I didn't want to tie the governance to specifically to github. Maybe I'll word it like:
```
The Valkey project includes all of the current and future repositories under the Valkey-io GitHub organization or whatever future code hosting platform the project uses.
```

?

Reviewer 2: Sure. Or just keep it as is. It doesn't matter much.

Reviewer: is it "Valkey" or "Valkey-io" organization?

Author: It's currently valkey-io organization. We're working on getting valkey though.

Maintainers are defined as individuals with full commit access to the Valkey repository as well as additional members defined in the MAINTAINERS.md file in a given projects repository.

> Maintainers of other repositories within the Valkey project are not members of the TSC unless explicitly added.

Reviewer 4: I'm a bit confused about the relationship between "maintainers" and "TSC". Although currently all TSC members are maintainers of the valkey core repo, but in the future these two groups may be changed separately. I think it would be better to describe them separately.

For example, we could use `MAINTAINERS.md` in the valkey repo to specifically detail the maintainers of the valkey repo. Additionally, introducing a `TSC.md` directly under valkey-io (maybe a new governance or TSC repo) to clarify the composition of the TSC, highlighting their role in overseeing all projects under the valkey-io. This setup ensures that any future additions of maintainers for other clients or modules to the TSC wouldn't impact the list of maintainers for the valkey repo.

Author: At least for now, practically maintainers = TSC. I think it makes the most sense to amend the document when that needs to change.

The TSC will appoint a Chair responsible for organizing TSC meetings.
If the TSC Chair is removed from the TSC (or the Chair steps down from that role), it is the responsibility of the TSC to appoint a new Chair.
The TSC can amend this governance document by no less than a 2/3 affirmative vote.

The TSC may, at its discretion, add or remove members who are not maintainers of the main Valkey repository.
The TSC may, at its discretion, add or remove maintainers from other repositories within the Valkey project.

## Voting

The TSC will strive for all decisions to be made by consensus.
While explicit agreement of the entire TSC is preferred, it is not required for consensus.
Rather, the TSC will determine consensus based on their good faith consideration of a number of factors, including the dominant view of the TSC and nature of support and objections.
The TSC will document evidence of consensus in accordance with these requirements.
If consensus cannot be reached, the TSC will make the decision by a vote.

A vote will also be called when an issue or pull request is marked as a major decision, which are decisions that have significant impact on the Valkey architecture or design.

> Examples of major decisions:

Reviewer 4: I think it would also be beneficial to include examples of clients and modules, such as "adding a new client or introducing a new module".

# Project Governance

> The Valkey project is managed by a Technical Steering Committee (TSC) composed of the maintainers of Valkey repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Valkey project is managed by a Technical Steering Committee (TSC) composed of the maintainers of the Valkey repository.
```

The Valkey project includes all of the current and future repositories under the Valkey-io organization.

> Maintainers are defined as individuals with full commit access to a repository, which should be in sync with the MAINTAINERS.md file in a given projects repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintainers are defined as individuals with full commit access to a repository, which shall be in sync with the MAINTAINERS.md file in a given projects repository.
```

Maintainers of other repositories within the Valkey project are not members of the TSC unless explicitly added.

## Technical Steering Committee

> The TSC will be responsible for oversight of all technical, project, approval, and policy matters for Valkey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TSC is responsible for oversight of all technical, project, approval, and policy matters for Valkey.
```

The TSC members are listed in the [MAINTAINERS.md](MAINTAINERS.md) file in the Valkey repository.
Maintainers (and accordingly, TSC members) may be added or removed by no less than 2/3 affirmative vote of the current TSC.

> The TSC will appoint a Chair responsible for organizing TSC meetings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TSC shall appoint a Chair responsible for organizing TSC meetings.
```

If the TSC Chair is removed from the TSC (or the Chair steps down from that role), it is the responsibility of the TSC to appoint a new Chair.
The TSC can amend this governance document by no less than a 2/3 affirmative vote.

The TSC may, at its discretion, add or remove members who are not maintainers of the main Valkey repository.
The TSC may, at its discretion, add or remove maintainers from other repositories within the Valkey project.

## Voting

> The TSC will strive for all decisions to be made by consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TSC shall strive for all decisions to be made by consensus.
```

While explicit agreement of the entire TSC is preferred, it is not required for consensus.

> Rather, the TSC will determine consensus based on their good faith consideration of a number of factors, including the dominant view of the TSC and nature of support and objections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather, the TSC shall determine consensus based on their good faith consideration of a number of factors, including the dominant view of the TSC and nature of support and objections.
```

> The TSC will document evidence of consensus in accordance with these requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TSC shall document evidence of consensus in accordance with these requirements.
```

> If consensus cannot be reached, the TSC will make the decision by a vote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If consensus cannot be reached, the TSC shall make the decision by a vote.
```

> A vote will also be called when an issue or pull request is marked as a major decision, which are decisions that have significant impact on the Valkey architecture or design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A vote shall also be called when an issue or pull request is marked as a major decision, which are decisions that have a significant impact on the Valkey architecture or design.
```

Examples of major decisions:
    * Fundamental changes to the Valkey core datastructures
    * Adding a new data structure or API
    * Changes that affect backward compatibility
    * New user visible fields that need to be maintained
    * Modifications to the TSC or other governance documents
    * Adding members to other roles within the Valkey project
    * Delegation of maintainership for projects to other groups or individuals
    * Adding or removing a new external library such as a client
    or module to the project.

Any member of the TSC can call a vote with reasonable notice to the TSC, setting out a discussion period and a separate voting period.
Any discussion may be conducted in person or electronically by text, voice, or video.

> The discussion will be open to the public, with the notable exception of discussions involving embargoed security issues or the addition or removal of maintainers, which will be private.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The discussion shall be open to the public, with the notable exception of discussions involving embargoed security issues or the addition or removal of maintainers, which will be private.
```

In any vote, each voting TSC member will have one vote.

> The TSC will give at least two weeks for all members to submit their vote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TSC shall give at least two weeks for all members to submit their vote.
```

Except as specifically noted elsewhere in this document, decisions by vote require a simple majority vote of all voting members.
It is the responsibility of the TSC chair to help facilitate the voting process as needed to make sure it completes within the voting period.

## Termination of Membership

A maintainer's access (and accordingly, their position on the TSC) will be removed if any of the following occur:

* Resignation: Written notice of resignation to the TSC.
* TSC Vote: 2/3 affirmative vote of the TSC to remove a member

> * Unreachable Member: If a member is unresponsive for more than six months, the remaining active members of the TSC may vote to remove to unreachable member by simple majority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Unreachable Member: If a member is unresponsive for more than six months, the remaining active members of the TSC may vote to remove the unreachable member by a simple majority.
```

## Technical direction for other Valkey projects

> The TSC may delegate decision making for other projects within the Valkey organization to the maintainers responsible for that project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TSC may delegate decision making for other projects within the Valkey organization to the maintainers responsible for those projects.
```

> Delegation of decision making for a project is considered a major decision, and should happen with an explicit vote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delegation of decision making for a project is considered a major decision, and shall happen with an explicit vote.
```

> Projects within the Valkey organization must indicate the individuals with commit permissions by updating the MAINTAINERS.md within their repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Projects within the Valkey organization must indicate the individuals with commit permissions by updating the MAINTAINERS.md within their repositories.
```
